Republic of the Philippines
STRENGTHENED SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL CURRICULUM CHEMISTRY 1
Grade 11
DepEd Complex, Meralco Avenue, Pasig City

1 
 
Course Description:  
 
This course provides learners with essential chemistry concepts and skills. Learners learn how to make accurate measurements, 
understand the electronic structure of atoms and isotopes, explain the behavior of subatomic particles, calculate percentage 
composition, and write compound formulas using nomenclature rules. Additionally, learners explore the various properties of 
chemical bonds and examine how these properties relate to the types of bonds in different compounds. The lessons can be applied 
in environmental science, community-based issues, and industrial processes, especially relating them to green chemistry and the 
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
Elective: Academic 
Prerequisite: None 
Time Allotment: 80 hours for one semester, 4 hours per week 
Schedule: First Semester 
 
Quarter 1 
Content Content Standards 
The learners learn that     
Learning Competencies 
The learners     
1. Scientific 
measurement 
 
1. accuracy, precision, and appropriate use of 
standard units of measurement are 
fundamental to Chemistry; 
 
 
1. explain the difference between mass, volume, and 
density of a solid using the correct and appropriate 
units; 
2. investigate the density of commonly used solids using 
laboratory equipment, including writing a scientific 
report; 
3. explain that accuracy and precision are important to 
assess the quality of experimental results; 
4. identify sources of error and propose improvements to 
enhance measurement reliability;   
5. apply scientific notation and explain how to determine 
the proper number of significant figures in 
calculations;

2 
 
2. The Quantum 
Theory and the 
electronic 
structure of 
atoms 
 
 
2. the contributions of Planck, Bohr, and 
Schrödinger helped in the development of 
Quantum Theory, which explains the 
behavior of subatomic particle; 
 
3. electrons of elements are arranged 
according to different energy levels, 
subshells, and orbitals based on the 
quantum mechanical model; and 
6. explain how Mendeleev developed the periodic table of 
elements; 
7. create a diagram of the periodic table to illustrate the 
relationship between atomic radius and atomic mass 
of elements across a period and down a group; 
8. draw a model of the discrete energy levels of an atom 
using the ‘spdf’ notation for the orbitals; 
9. write the electronic configuration of common elements 
following the principles of quantum theory; 
10. explain and predict main energy levels, sublevels, and 
orbitals in relation to the electronic configurations of 
elements in periods and groups in the periodic table; 
4. Isotopes 2. isotopes of elements can be both beneficial     
and harmful. 
11. explain that isotopes of an element have the same 
number of protons but a different number of 
neutrons; 
12. use secondary resources to identify natural and 
human-made radioisotopes and their properties in 
terms of the type of radiation emitted and their half-
life; and 
13. use secondary sources to describe the use of 
radioisotopes in medicine.  
Performance Standards 
By the end of the quarter, learners make reliable measurements and record data using appropriate laboratory and/or measuring 
tools. They also apply significant figures, scientific notation, and unit conversion. Using the Quantum Mechanical Model, they 
describe electrons in levels and write electron configurations for elements. Learners explain what isotopes are and how they may 
be useful and possibly harmful. 
Suggested Performance Task 
● Make a 2-minute video presentation explaining how radioactive isotopes are being used to cure cancer and goiter.

3 
 
Quarter 2 
 
Content Content Standards 
The learners learn that     
Learning Competencies 
The learners     
1. Atomic mass 
 
1. the atomic mass of an element can be 
described as “relative” or “average”; 
 
1. explain the difference between relative atomic mass 
and average atomic mass of an element, and 
describe their importance; 
2. Percentage 
composition 
and formula of 
compounds 
 
2. the percentage composition of elements in a 
compound can be used to determine 
empirical and molecular formulas ; 
 
2. calculate the percent composition of a compound, 
such as calcium carbonate [CaCO3], from its 
formula; 
3. use a table to show similarities and differences 
between the empirical formula and the molecular 
formula of a compound; 
4. calculate the empirical formula and molecular 
formula of a given compound; 
3. Chemical 
nomenclature 
 
3. chemical compounds are named using the 
rules of the International Union of Pure and 
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC); 
5. use the rules of IUPAC nomenclature to name 
common compounds, such as H 2O, NaCl, NH3, 
NaHCO3, H2SO4, ZnSO4, MgO, Fe3O4, CaO, and 
Ca(OH)2; 
6. write chemical formulas of compounds commonly 
found in the home, such as sodium chloride, 
ammonia, sodium fluoride, hydrochloric acid, 
ethanol, sucrose, acetone, and acetic acid; 
4. Chemical bonds 
and properties 
of chemical 
compounds 
 
 
 
 
4. the chemical formula of a compound is a 
symbolic representation of its chemical 
composition; and 
5. the properties of chemical compounds 
depend on the type of bond between the 
elements in a compound. 
7. identify that chemical bonds may be ionic or 
covalent and explain the differences in terms of the 
electrons involved; 
8. use secondary sources to create a table that 
includes the chemical formula of an ionic 
compound, such as sodium chloride, and a 
covalent compound, such as water, to highlight the 
differences in their physical properties, including 
their physical state, solubility, melting and boiling 
points, and electrical conductivity;

4 
 
9. draw a Lewis structure of an ionic compound and a 
covalent compound applying the Octet rule; and 
10.  predict the polarity of compounds based on 
electronegativity and molecular geometry. 
Performance Standards 
By the end of the quarter, learners explain the difference between relative and average atomic mass, and they correctly name 
compounds using the IUPAC nomenclature standard. They write formulas particularly for compounds commonly used in 
everyday life. They differentiate between ionic and covalent bonds and use illustrations and diagrams to explain the Lewis 
structure of an ionic compound and a covalent compound, applying the octet rule. They write chemical names and formulas for 
ionic and covalent compounds and describe their properties. Learners predict polarity based on electronegativity and molecular 
geometry. 
Suggested Performance Task 
● Conduct science experiments to investigate the physical properties of ionic and covalent compounds, such as physical 
state, solubility, melting and boiling point, and conductivity.