Republic of the Philippines
STRENGTHENED SENIOR HIGH SCHOOL CURRICULUM PHYSICS 1
Grade 11
DepEd Complex, Meralco Avenue, Pasig City

1 
 
Course Description:  
This course introduces learners to the fundamental principles governing  the physical world, focusing on matter, motion, and energy 
interactions. It covers core topics in physics, including measurement, kinematics, dynamics, energy, momentum, rotational 
mechanics, and periodic motion. Through hands-on experiments, real-world problem solving, and critical analysis, students will 
develop scientific inquiry, mathematical reasoning, and an appreciation for the role of physics in technology, society, and STEM-
related careers.  
 
Elective: Academic 
Prerequisite: None 
Time Allotment: 80 hours for one semester, 4 hours per week 
Schedule: First Semester 
 
Quarter 1: Measurements and Translational Kinematics 
Content Content Standards 
The learners learn that     
Learning Competencies 
The learners     
1. Introduction to 
Physics 
1. Physics is fundamental to understanding the 
natural world in a scientific way and leads to 
the development of many applications that 
benefit society; 
1. use secondary sources to evaluate the impact of 
physics in society and identify the range of careers 
that are available through the study of physics; 
2. Kinematics 2. measuring should be done precisely and 
accurately, and must be expressed correctly; 
and 
2. conduct simple experiments on the translational 
motion of objects in one- and two-dimensions using 
standard and alternative measuring tools to 
measure length and time quantitatively; 
3. define the fundamental quantities and the basis of 
its SI units;  
3. qualitative, quantitative, and graphical 
analysis of motion provide complementary 
ways to understand, describe, and predict 
motion. 
 
4. calculate displacement, velocity, and acceleration 
in one-dimensional motion; 
5. create and interpret motion graphs of one-
dimensional motion (displacement-time, velocity-
time, and acceleration-time graphs); 
6. derive the four kinematic equations and their 
various forms through algebraic methods to solve

2 
 
various cases of uniformly accelerated motion 
(horizontal and vertical);  
7. carry out  first-hand investigations involving 2-
dimensional projectile and circular motion to 
investigate factors, such as speed, radius, and 
centripetal force; 
8. explain concepts of moving reference frames and 
relative motion; and 
9. solve physics problems involving uniformly 
accelerated motion (horizontal and vertical), 
projectile, circular, and relative motion in one- and 
two-dimensions in various contexts, such as 
moving vehicles, riverboat problems, aircraft, and 
spacecraft navigation. 
Performance Standards 
By the end of the quarter, learners properly measure and use pertinent units, compute resultant vectors, and analyze motion 
graphs. They explain, calculate, and analyze one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and relative motion in practical contexts and 
solve problems using kinematic equations. They also describe and explain how basic physics principles are applied to describe 
and make predictions about motion in everyday situations and scenarios. 
 
Suggested Performance Task 
 
● Prove through experimentation, data gathering, graphical representation, and analysis that vertical and horizontal 
motion are independent of each other in projectile motion.

3 
 
Quarter 2: Dynamics 
Content Content Standards 
The learners learn that     
Learning Competencies 
The learners: 
Translational 
dynamics 
1. Types of forces 
2. Newton’s Laws of 
Motion and their 
applications 
3. Work and power 
4. Energy 
5. Momentum 
 
1. Newton's Laws of Motion, work, energy, 
power, and the conservation of energy are 
essential for understanding the behavior of 
objects and systems; 
 
2. momentum, impulse, and the laws of 
conservation are essential in evaluating the 
efficiency and safety of physical systems; 
1. conduct simple experiments on forces using 
standard and alternative measuring tools to     
measure length, mass, volume, and time 
quantitatively;  
2. determine the resultant of one- to two-dimensional 
vectors using analytical methods; 
3. apply Newton’s laws of motion in solving word 
problems involving equilibrium and non-
equilibrium cases; 
4. calculate work done by an applied force and the 
power generated in practical situations such as 
engineering and sports science; 
5. explain how energy is conserved in various real-life 
scenarios; 
6. develop a table to summarize how the principles of 
impulse and conservation of linear momentum 
apply in various real-life contexts, such as sports 
performance, vehicle safety systems, industrial 
processes, and space exploration; 
 
Rotational 
mechanics 
1. Rotational motion 
2. Force and torque 
3. Mass and moment 
of inertia 
 
3. rotational mechanics can maximize efficiency 
in physical systems; and 
7. describe rotational motion in terms of angular 
displacement, angular velocity, angular 
acceleration, and angular frequency; 
8. explain various phenomena involving rotational 
motion using the concepts of torque, moment of 
inertia, and angular momentum; 
9. design a prototype applying concepts of rotational 
motion to improve processes involved in various 
fields such as the automotive industry, amusement 
park rides, and manufacturing;

4 
 
Periodic motion 
1. Oscillations 
2. Simple harmonic 
motion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. simple harmonic motion can be characterized 
by periodic motion.     
 
10. draw on personal experiences and secondary 
sources to demonstrate through simple activities 
the concept of simple harmonic motion in natural 
and human-made situations; 
11. describe simple harmonic motion in terms of 
amplitude, period, frequency, phase, and how its 
principles are applied in the design of everyday 
systems; and 
12. use mathematical models to solve for and describe 
the displacement, velocity, and acceleration of 
objects in simple harmonic motion.     
Performance Standards 
By the end of the quarter, learners properly measure and use pertinent units, compute resultant vectors, and analyze motion 
graphs. They explain, calculate, and analyze one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and relative motion in practical contexts and 
solve problems using kinematic equations. They also describe and explain how basic physics principles are applied to describe 
and make predictions about motion in everyday situations and scenarios. 
 
Suggested Performance Task 
 
● Design and run a Rube Goldberg Machine to demonstrate the concepts of the laws of conservation of energy, Newton’s 
laws of motion, and rotational motion. Write a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the system.